arXiv:2502.02013v2  [cs.LG]  15 Jun 2025
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Oscar Skean 1 Md Rifat Arefin 2 3 Dan Zhao 4 Niket Patel 5 Jalal Naghiyev 6
Yann LeCun4 7 Ravid Shwartz-Ziv 4 8
Abstract
From extracting features to generating text, the
outputs of large language models (LLMs) typi-
cally rely on the final layers, following the con-
ventional wisdom that earlier layers capture only
low-level cues. However, our analysis shows that
intermediate layers can encode even richer rep-
resentations, often improving performance on a
range of downstream tasks. To explain and quan-
tify these hidden-layer properties, we propose a
unified framework of representation quality met-
rics based on information theory, geometry, and
invariance to input perturbations. Our framework
highlights how each layer balances information
compression and signal preservation, revealing
why mid-depth embeddings can exceed the last
layer’s performance. Through extensive exper-
iments on 32 text-embedding tasks across vari-
ous architectures (transformers, state-space mod-
els) and domains (language, vision), we demon-
strate that intermediate layers consistently provide
stronger features, challenging the standard view
on final-layer embeddings and opening new direc-
tions on using mid-layer representations for more
robust and accurate representations.
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have driven remarkable
progress in natural language processing (NLP), achieving
state-of-the-art results on many tasks (Brown et al., 2020;
Devlin et al., 2019; Li et al., 2022). At the heart of most
applications lies a common assumption: final-layer repre-
sentations are the most useful for downstream tasks. Yet a
fundamental question remains: does the final layer always
yield the best representation?
1University of Kentucky 2Mila-Quebec AI Institute 3University
of Montreal 4New York University5University of California, Los
Angeles 6Independent 7Meta FAIR 8Wand.AI. Correspondence to:
Oscar Skean <oscar.skean@uky.edu>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55Average Main Score
Pythia-410m
Mamba-370m
BERT-base
Figure 1: Intermediate layers consistently outperform
final layers on downstream tasks. The average score of
32 MTEB tasks using the outputs of every model layer as
embeddings for three different model architectures. The
x-axis is the depth percentage of the layer, rather than the
layer number which varies across models.
In this paper, we conduct a layer-wise analysis of LLMs
across diverse architectures—including transformer-based
ones (Vaswani et al., 2017), state-space models (SSMs)
(Gu & Dao, 2024), and encoder-based models like BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019)—spanning parameter scales from tens
of millions to billions. Through systematic evaluation on
32 embedding tasks from the Massive Text Embedding
Benchmark (MTEB) (Muennighoff et al., 2022), we find
that intermediate layers often surpass the final layer by up
to 16% in downstream accuracy. Figure 1 illustrates this
phenomenon, where mid-depth layers provide particularly
strong representations while the very last layer can become
overly specialized to the pretraining objective.
A unified framework. To better understand intermedi-
ate layers’ effectiveness, we combine three complementary
perspectives (Section 3):
• Information-theoretic: How much do layers com-
press or preserve semantic information (Shwartz-Ziv
& Tishby, 2019; Shwartz-Ziv, 2022)?
• Geometric: How do token embeddings unfold in high-
dimensional space (Hosseini & Fedorenko, 2023))?
1
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
• Invariance: Are embeddings robust to input pertur-
bations (e.g., InfoNCE (Oord et al., 2018), LiDAR
(Thilak et al., 2024) and DiME (Skean et al., 2023))?
We show that these perspectives can be viewed under a
single lens, which clarifies how intermediate layers strike a
balance between retaining features and discarding noise.
Key findings and contributions. Our investigation leads
to several important insights:
• Intermediate layers consistently outperform final lay-
ers. This pattern is evident in both transformers and
SSMs, suggesting a broad architecture-agnostic effect.
• Autoregressive vs. masked-language training.Autore-
gressive models exhibit a pronounced mid-layer “com-
pression valley,” whereas masked or bidirectional mod-
els show milder intermediate changes.
• Domain-general effect. We extend these results to vi-
sion models and find that autoregressive image trans-
formers display the same mid-depth bottleneck, indi-
cating that the training objective, rather than the data
modality, is the key driver.
• CoT finetuning. Analyzing chain-of-thought (CoT)
reveals that finetuning can reshape mid-layer entropy,
preserving latent context for multi-step reasoning.
Overall, our results challenge the default reliance on final-
layer embeddings and highlight intermediate layers as poten-
tially underutilized sources of meaningful features. In this
paper, we detail our unified framework (Section 3), present
extensive experiments in both language and vision (Sec-
tion 4, 5, 6), and conclude with a discussion of our findings,
their implications, and future directions. 1
2. Related Work
Understanding Neural Representations. A long line
of research has aimed to understand how deep neural net-
works encode and organize information. Early studies em-
ployed linear probes for intermediate layers (Alain & Ben-
gio, 2017), while subsequent efforts introduced more so-
phisticated techniques such as SVCCA (Raghu et al., 2017)
to compare learned features across architectures and train-
ing regimes. Although these approaches have shed light
on representation dynamics, most focus on vision models
or shallow networks. In contrast, our work contributes to
a growing body of literature extending layer-wise analy-
sis to large-scale language models, emphasizing specific
behaviors of intermediate layers across diverse architec-
tures. Complementing our empirical findings, Saponati et al.
(2025) present a theoretical analysis of how different pretext
1We make our code available at https://github.com/
OFSkean/information_flow
tasks, such as next-token prediction and masked language
modeling, influence the structure of learned representations.
Layer-wise Analysis in Language Models. Recent work
has increasingly focused on identifying which transformer
layers encode different types of information. For example,
linguistic features such as part-of-speech tags or semantic
roles are best encoded by the middle layers of a BERT (Liu
et al., 2019; Tenney et al., 2019; V oita et al., 2019). More re-
cent work has shown that mid-depth layers sometimes hold
surprisingly robust features, challenging the usual emphasis
on final layer representations (Jin et al., 2024; Gurnee &
Tegmark, 2023; Fan et al., 2024). A related line of work in-
vestigates the attention sink phenomenon (Xiao et al., 2024;
Brunner et al., 2020; Gu et al., 2025), in which attention
disproportionately concentrates on a single token. Notably,
intermediate decoder layers have been shown to not exhibit
these extreme attention sinks (Barbero et al., 2025), sug-
gesting they engage in more distributed and meaningful
information processing than the shallow or deep layers.
Compression and Generalization. Multiple lines of
research link compression and generalization perfor-
mance (Deletang et al., 2024). For instance, Bordes et al.
(2023) demonstrated that discarding certain layers in self-
supervised encoders can even improve downstream accu-
racy, while Park et al. (2024a) found that LLM embed-
dings often lie in low-dimensional manifolds. Our empirical
study reinforces these ideas by demonstrating that many net-
works—especially autoregressive transformers—naturally
develop a mid-layer bottleneck that appears crucial for bal-
ancing “signal” versus “noise.” We show how intermediate
layers can achieve optimal trade-offs between preserving
task-relevant information and discarding superfluous detail.
Representation Quality Metrics. A variety of metrics
have been proposed to quantify the “quality” of learned
representations. We group them into three main categories:
• Information-theoretic measures capture how much a
model’s internal representations compress or preserve
relevant information. For example, the Information
Bottleneck (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2019; Shwartz-Ziv,
2022) analyzes whether intermediate layers discard
noise while retaining essential features. Intrinsic di-
mensionality, which describes the minimum number
of features to represent data, has also been used to ana-
lyze intermediate layers in LLMs (Cheng et al., 2025;
Valeriani et al., 2023; Razzhigaev et al., 2024). This
line of work has shown semantic abstractions useful for
downstream tasks are better encoded in middle layers
than last layers in large transformer models. While
we do not study intrinsic dimensionality in our subse-
quent analysis, it would make a promising direction
2
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
for future work.
• Geometric measures focus on the structure of embed-
dings in high-dimensional space. Classical approaches
include analyzing singular values and effective rank of
the representation matrix (Garrido et al., 2023). The
anisotropy metric of Razzhigaev et al. (2024) has been
used to study compression in intermediate model lay-
ers and we compare our results with their findings in
Section 4.2. Anisotropy fits in well with our proposed
framework, though we leave a formal integration to
future work. Recent work explores curvature (Hosseini
& Fedorenko, 2023) to quantify how smoothly tokens
are mapped across consecutive positions or time steps.
• Task-based or invariance metricsevaluate how well
representations support downstream goals. For in-
stance, augmentations-based approaches such as In-
foNCE (Oord et al., 2018) and LiDAR (Thilak et al.,
2024) estimate invariance to perturbations, while meth-
ods like NESum or Self-Cluster (Agrawal et al., 2022)
link closely to entropy. In computer vision, these
scores often correlate strongly with downstream ac-
curacy, highlightFing how robust the embeddings are.
Although these representation quality metric categories may
appear distinct, we show (Section 3) that many can be uni-
fied under a single lens. This unification illuminates why
certain intermediate layers balance compression, geometry,
and invariance so effectively, leading to better representa-
tions for downstream tasks.
Overall, our work bridges these overlapping threads by eval-
uating a range of architectures and training paradigms via
a unified set of metrics. Beyond merely confirming that
intermediate layers can be effective, we elucidate why this
happens, tying it to fundamental properties such as entropy,
invariance, and geometry. This novel perspective provides
an avenue for both finer-grained diagnostics of large lan-
guage models and more deliberate design of mid-layer rep-
resentations for downstream tasks.
3. A Unified Framework for Neural
Representations
Key Takeaway: Matrix-based entropy unifies seem-
ingly disparate metrics of representation quality, pro-
viding a single theoretical lens for analyzing com-
pression, geometry, and invariance.
A central challenge in analyzing internal representations is
determining how to assess their quality. Although existing
work draws on numerous ideas—from mutual information
to geometric manifold analysis to invariance under augmen-
tations—these threads can seem disparate. In this section,
we consolidate them into a unified theoretical framework
that shows how these seemingly different metrics connect
and why they collectively measure “representation quality.”
3.1. Notation and Motivation
Consider a neural network that maps inputs x (e.g., tokens
in a sequence) to internal hidden states Z. We denote Z ∈
RN ×D as a matrix of N data samples (or tokens) in D
dimensions. Some key questions arise:
1. How compressed are these representations?
2. How robust are they to perturbations or augmentations?
3. How do they geometrically organize different inputs?
Answers to these questions can illuminate which layers
strike the right balance between preserving relevant features
and discarding noise.
3.2. Matrix-Based Entropy: A Common Theoretical
Thread
We focus on a key quantity known as matrix-based entropy
(Giraldo et al., 2014; Skean et al., 2023), which applies
directly to the Gram matrix K = ZZ⊤. Let {λi(K)} be
the (nonnegative) eigenvalues of K. For any order α > 0,
define:
Sα(Z) = 1
1 − α log
 rX
i=1

λi(K)
tr(K)
α
, (1)
where r = rank( K) ≤ min(N, D). Intuitively, if only
a few eigenvalues dominate, Sα(Z) is small—indicating
a highly compressed representation. Conversely, if Z is
spread out across many principal directions, Sα(Z) is large.
By varying α, one smoothly transitions between notions
like collision entropy (α = 2) and von Neumann entropy
(α → 1). We will typically use α = 1 for simplicity.
Bridging geometry, invariance, and feature locality. A
key benefit of matrix-based entropy is that it unifies multiple
representational perspectives:
• Compression or information content: A handful of
large eigenvalues in K = ZZ⊤ indicates that Z is low-
rank, i.e. the model has collapsed much of the input
variation into fewer dimensions. In contrast, a more
uniform eigenvalue spectrum implies higher-entropy,
more diverse features.
• Geometric smoothness: If tokens within a prompt
follow a trajectory in embedding space with sharp
turns, that curvature can manifest as skewed eigenvalue
spectra (Hosseini & Fedorenko, 2023). Curvature also
differentiates local transitions (token-to-token) from
global structural patterns across longer segments or
entire prompts.
3
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
• Invariance under augmentations: Metrics like In-
foNCE (Oord et al., 2018) and LiDAR (Thilak et al.,
2024) effectively measure whether augmentations of
the same sample (e.g. character swaps) map to similar
embeddings. Strong invariance corresponds to stable
clustering in ZZ⊤, which again depends on the distri-
bution of eigenvalues and how local vs. global features
are retained or discarded.
Thus, evaluating Sα(Z) provides a single lens for assess-
ing “representation quality” across compression, geometric
structure, and invariance—and highlights how both local
details and global patterns are organized.
3.3. Representation Evaluation Metrics
Key Takeaway: Information-theoretic, geometric,
and invariance-based metrics offer complementary
perspectives on representation quality that can all
be understood through matrix-based entropy.
We now introduce the seven representation evaluation met-
rics used in our experiments, grouped into three broad cat-
egories: (1) information-theoretic, (2) geometric, and (3)
augmentation-invariance. All relate back to the Gram ma-
trix K and hence to Eq. (1).
3.3.1. I NFORMATION -T HEORETIC METRICS
Prompt Entropy. Following Wei et al. (2024), we apply
matrix-based entropy (Eq. 1) to the token embeddingswithin
a single prompt. This prompt entropy quantifies how widely
tokens are spread in the embedding space. Higher entropy
indicates more diverse, less redundant token-level features;
lower entropy implies stronger compression.
Dataset Entropy. We can also aggregate embeddings
across N prompts by taking the mean token embedding
of each prompt to form Z ∈ RN ×D. Applying entropy to Z
yields a dataset-level measure of global diversity—revealing
how distinctly the model separates different inputs.
Effective Rank. (Roy & Vetterli, 2007) can be shown to
be a lower bound to exp(S1(Z)), highlighting how dimen-
sionality effectively shrinks if the representation is strongly
compressed. We prove this connection in Theorem 1. This
has implications for popular representation evaluation met-
rics such as RankMe (Garrido et al., 2023) and LiDAR (Thi-
lak et al., 2024), which are both inspired by Effective Rank.
3.3.2. G EOMETRIC METRICS
Curvature. Proposed by Hosseini & Fedorenko (2023),
curvature captures how sharply the token embeddings turn
when viewed as a sequence inRD. For a prompt of length L,
let vk = zk+1 − zk be the difference between consecutive
tokens. The average curvature is:
¯C = 1
L − 2
L−2X
k=1
arccos
 v⊤
k+1vk
∥vk+1∥∥vk∥

.
Higher curvature means consecutive tokens shift direction
abruptly and more local level features; lower curvature sug-
gests a smoother trajectory and global level features.
3.3.3. A UGMENTATION INVARIANCE METRICS
Lastly, we assess how stable the model’s representations
are to small perturbations of the same input (e.g., random
character swaps, keyboard-level changes; see Appendix).
Suppose a prompt pi is augmented into p(a)
i and p(b)
i . After
embedding these, we compare the row vectors in Z1, Z2 ∈
RN ×D under different scoring criteria:
InfoNCE. This self-supervised objective (Oord et al.,
2018) encourages matched samples to lie close in embed-
ding space while pushing unmatched samples away. Alower
InfoNCE loss indicates stronger invariance to augmentation.
LiDAR. LiDAR (Thilak et al., 2024) uses a linear discrim-
inant approach that measures within-class versus between-
class scatter. Treating each prompt as its own class, LiDAR
checks how well augmentations form tight clusters.
DiME. Similarly, DiME (Skean et al., 2023) is grounded
in matrix-based entropy. It compares real paired samples
against random pairings to estimate how uniquely aligned
correct augmentations are.
3.4. Core Theoretical Results
Key Takeaway: Our theoretical framework estab-
lishes concrete connections between representation
entropy and downstream performance through prop-
erties like effective rank and invariance.
Here, we summarize key statements that justify why these
metrics meaningfully measure representation quality. We
refer to the appendix G for details and proofs. Beyond serv-
ing as a unifying view, matrix-based entropy also connects
to foundational concepts like majorization, Schur concav-
ity, and mutual information. Furthermore, we can directly
relate the eigenvalue entropy to the matrix entropy, most
naturally via the Effective Rank (Roy & Vetterli, 2007). The
following theorem makes this connection explicit.
Theorem 1 (Lower Bound via Effective Rank) . For
Shannon-based entropy (α → 1),
EffRank(Z) ≤ exp
 
S1(Z)

,
4
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
meaning a large effective rank implies a high entropy.
Under appropriate conditions on the data distribution and
model, we can show connections between prompt entropy
and dataset entropy via the following scaling behaviors:
Theorem 2 (Informal).
1. If prompt entropy remains near its maximum for all
prompts, then the dataset entropy S2
 
Z Z
⊤
grows on
the order of log
  L2
N

.
2. If prompt entropy instead stays near its minimum for
all prompts, then dataset entropy grows more slowly,
on the order of log
  L2
N 3

.
In short, high token-level (prompt) diversity encourages
broader global diversity in the dataset-level embeddings,
whereas over-compressing token representations can limit
how effectively different prompts separate. Our subsequent
analysis connects these ideas to self-supervised objectives
like InfoNCE, which also tie higher entropy to stronger ro-
bustness and discriminability in the learned representations.
Theorem 3 (Dataset Entropy Bounds InfoNCE). For data
X and representation Z(X), the InfoNCE loss on N sam-
ples satisfies:
log(N) − InfoNCE ≤ I(X; Z) ≤ H(Z),
where H(Z) is interpretable as matrix-based entropy at the
dataset level. Hence, reducing InfoNCE implies learning a
higher-entropy (and thus often more robust) representation.
Practical outlook. Overall, our theoretical analysis shows
that compression (entropy), geometry (curvature, rank), and
invariance (e.g. InfoNCE) are all facets of how the Gram
matrix ZZ⊤ distributes variance. Examining these met-
rics across different layers reveals exactly where a network
“prunes” redundancy (low entropy) versus preserving essen-
tial distinctions (high entropy). This unified perspective also
facilitates cross-architecture comparisons (e.g. transformers
vs. SSMs) by highlighting how each architecture organizes
information internally. Beyond offering a theoretical founda-
tion, it provides a practical blueprint for diagnosing, tuning,
and improving hidden-layer representations.
4. Empirical Results
In this section, we empirically test our theoretical framework
through extensive experiments across architectures, scales,
and training regimes. We focus on three key questions:
• Do intermediate layers consistently outperform fi-
nal layers across diverse downstream tasks?
• How do these intermediate representations differ
across architectures, training stages, and scales?
• How does post-training methods (e.g., fine-tuning
and chain-of-thought) reshape representations?
4.1. Downstream Task Performance
Key Takeaway: Intermediate layers of language
models consistently outperform final layers across
all architectures and tasks, challenging the conven-
tional wisdom of using final-layer representations.
In this section, we use intermediate layers for downstream
embedding tasks and employ our unified framework from
Section 3, measuring all the embeddings across all layers.
4.1.1. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Models We evaluate three distinct architectural families:
Pythia and Llama3 (decoder-only transformers) (Biderman
et al., 2023; Dubey et al., 2024), Mamba (state space
model) (Gu & Dao, 2024), BERT (encoder-only trans-
former) (Devlin et al., 2019) and LLM2Vec models (bidi-
rectional attention) (Behnam Ghader et al., 2024).
Tasks We test each layer’s embeddings on 32 tasks from
the Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB) (Muen-
nighoff et al., 2022), spanning classification, clustering, and
reranking dor a comprehensive evaluation across various
tasks. We refer to the Appendix for details.
4.1.2. I NTERMEDIATE LAYERS OFTEN OUTPERFORM
FINAL LAYERS
Are final-layer embeddings indeed optimal for downstream
tasks? In Figure 1, we compare average performance on
MTEB tasks across all layers of the three models.
Key observation. In nearly every task, some intermediate
layer outperforms the final layer.The absolute improvement
ranges from 2% to as high as 16% on average, and the best
layer often resides around the mid-depth of the network.
This phenomena is consistent across all the different archi-
tectures. This confirms emerging observations in recent
work for generation tasks (Bordes et al., 2023; El-Nouby
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2020; Fan et al., 2024) and extends
them to a wider range of benchmarks and tasks.
Why do these layers matter? From our theoretical per-
spective, intermediate layers appear to strike a balance
between retaining sufficient information (avoiding over-
compression) and discarding low-level noise. Later in Sec-
tion 4.2, we show that these sweet spots are not random but
tied to how intermediate layers are processing information.
5
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
6.0
7.5
9.0
Normalized Prompt Entropy
×10 1
Pythia
Mamba
BERT
(a) Prompt Entropy
0 25 50 75 100
Layer Depth Percentage
1.04
1.08
1.12
1.16
Curvature
 (b) Curvature
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
2
3
4LiDAR
 (c) LiDAR
Figure 2: Pythia and Mamba’s intermediate layers show pronounced changes in representation quality metrics, while
BERT’s remain more stable.Three representation evaluation metrics calculated on the wikitext dataset for every layer in
Pythia-410M, Mamba 370M, and BERT-base architectures. The x-axis denotes layer depth as a percentage, allowing fair
comparison between models with different layer counts.
4.1.3. L AYER-W ISE METRICS CORRELATE WITH
DOWNSTREAM PERFORMANCE
To validate our framework, we analyze how each evaluation
metric correlates with downstream performance. Figures 3
and 8 show distance correlations between metrics and task
scores for Pythia-410M. We find that all metrics exhibit
strong relationships with downstream performance. Among
them, curvature, DiME, and InfoNCE stand out with partic-
ularly high correlations. These associations remain robust
across different correlation measures, including Spearman
and Kendall, reinforcing the reliability of our findings.
Our results suggest that our metrics capture some aspects of
intermediate representations that contribute to downstream
utility. In Appendix E, we leverage these strong correlations
to select high-performing layers in an unsupervised manner,
following (Agrawal et al., 2022; Garrido et al., 2023; Thi-
lak et al., 2024). In short, we can identify an intermediate
layer that surpasses the final layer in downstream perfor-
mance—without using any task-specific labels. For instance,
using DiME-based layer selection leads to a 3% average
improvement in MTEB scores for the Pythia-410M model.
4.2. Architectural and Scale Differences
Key Takeaway: Different architectures exhibit dis-
tinct patterns of information compression. Autore-
gressive models show mid-layer bottlenecks while
bidirectional models maintain more uniform trends.
Aside from strong correlations with downstream perfor-
mance, we can use our evaluation framework to assess the
internal behaviors of LLMs. In both this section and Sec-
tion 4.3, we use WikiText-103 (Merity et al., 2017) for
analyzing our representation metrics on standard textual
data. To investigate how architecture and model size influ-
ence representation quality, we compare three fundamen-
tally different LLM variants—BERT (encoder-only), Pythia
(decoder-only), and Mamba (state-space model)—and then
scale up Pythia to observe emerging trends.
Encoder vs. Decoder vs. SSM. Figure 2 shows how
prompt entropy, curvature, and augmentation metrics evolve
across each model’s layers. BERT, which encodes the en-
tire input bidirectionally, generally maintains high entropy
across layers, suggesting minimal compression: the model
can see all tokens at once and need not discard as much
information. By contrast, the decoder-only Pythia exhibits
a strong mid-layer entropy dip, reflecting its autoregressive
objective’s tendency to filter or prune non-local details in
the middle of the network. As a result, Pythia’s “sweet spot”
for downstream tasks often lies around mid-depth, where it
LiDAR Dataset
 Entropy
Prompt
 Entropy
InfoNCE Curvature DiME
Representation Metrics
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00Distance Correlation (dCor)
Figure 3: Relationship between representation metrics
and task performance averaged across layers for Pythia
410M. Using distance correlation (dCor), we see strong as-
sociative relationships across the board with DiME exhibit-
ing the strongest relationship with downstream performance.
We use dCor due to its robustness and ability to measure
both linear and non-linear relationships (dCor ∈ [0, 1] with
0 indicating statistical independence and 1 indicating strong
dependency). We defer additional results to the Appendix.
6
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
balances essential context and compression. Mamba, mean-
while, processes sequences through a state-space approach
that yields flatter, more uniform curves across depth: it nei-
ther retains as much information as BERT nor compresses
as aggressively as Pythia’s mid-layers. These conclusions
align with Razzhigaev et al. (2024) which showed a flat
layer-wise anisotropy for encoder models and a spike in
intermediate layer anisotropy for decoder models.
Scaling Size Effects. In Figure 12, we analyze Pythia
models ranging from 14M to 1B parameters. Larger models
display more pronounced intermediate compression (en-
tropy dips), indicating a heightened ability to distill relevant
features. We also observe smoother token trajectories (lower
curvature) and stronger invariance (higher LiDAR), consis-
tent with findings that bigger models more effectively filter
noise and capture long-range dependencies. These trends re-
inforce why performance peaks in the middle of the network:
larger models hold more capacity to compress intermediate
representations, yet still preserve crucial semantic details.
Finetuning Effects In Figure 13, we study how finetuning
affects the internal representations of Llama3 (Dubey et al.,
2024). We compare the baseline Llama3-8B to two fine-
tuned LLM2Vec models (Behnam Ghader et al., 2024). The
LLM2Vec-mntp-unsup-simcse model enables bidirectional
attention in Llama3 and goes through two unsupervised
training phases to improve Llama3’s performance on em-
bedding tasks. The LLM2Vec-mntp-supervised adds an
additional supervised finetuning phase. It is clear that both
finetuned models have improved augmentation invariance.
Furthermore, the unsupervised model has higher prompt
entropy than Llama3 while the supervised model has less.
Layer-Level Analysis of Transformer Sub-Components.
While our experiments treat each transformer layer as a
single unit, transformer blocks are composed of multiple
sub-layers (pre-attention normalization, self-attention, resid-
uals, MLPs). By measuring entropy after each sub-layer,
we find in Figure 15 that residual connections drive the mid-
network compression observed in Section 4.2. Specifically:
• Sub-layers before residuals (e.g. pre-attention, atten-
tion scores, or MLP pre-residual outputs) often show
only mild compression.
• Residual sub-layers exhibit a pronounced drop in en-
tropy, indicating a significant filtering of information.
A concurrent study (Csordás et al., 2025) observed a
decrease in the residual stream norm in the second half
of decoder models, reinforcing our findings.
The strong entropy “valley” at intermediate layers is tied
to how residual paths merge new signals with the existing
hidden state. This aligns with prior work indicating that
residuals act as a regularizer (Marion et al., 2024), smooth-
ing out spurious components in hidden representations.
4.3. Impact of Training Progression
Takeaway: Significant changes during training oc-
cur in intermediate layers and early layers stabilize
quickly, supporting the detokenization hypothesis.
We measure Pythia’s metrics at multiple checkpoints to un-
derstand how layer-wise representations evolve throughout
training (Figures 4 and 11). Two main observations emerge:
Intermediate Layers Undergo the Most Change. The
largest shifts in representation quality occur in mid-depth
layers. Specifically, prompt entropy steadily decreases there
as training progresses, implying that intermediate layers
increasingly compress and abstract the input. Meanwhile,
LiDAR scores are minimal in these same layers. Likewise,
curvature becomes smoother in the middle of the network,
suggesting the model refines its internal structure to capture
longer-range or more nuanced patterns in language.
Early Layers Stabilize Quickly. In contrast to interme-
diate layers, the earliest layers change very little after the
initial phase of training. This observation aligns with the
“detokenization” hypothesis of Lad et al. (2024), which
posits that the main functional role of early layers is to
convert raw tokens into a basic embedding space. This idea
is closely related to the “shared task” layers of Zhao et al.
(2024), introduced in the context of instruction tuning on
diverse tasks. In particular, they show that the first nine lay-
ers of LlaMA 2 7B (Touvron et al., 2023) perform general
task-agnostic operations. As a result, the most substantial
changes to representations, such as enhanced compression,
are driven primarily by the intermediate layers, reinforcing
their importance for learning robust, high-level features.
4.4. Impact of Chain-of-Thought Finetuning
Key Takeaway: CoT finetuning enables models to
maintain richer context throughout their layers.
Recent work has highlighted Chain-of-Thought (CoT) fine-
tuning as a powerful strategy for improving reasoning capa-
bilities (Arefin et al., 2025; DeepSeek-AI, 2025). To exam-
ine its effects on representations, in Figure 5 we compare
Qwen 2.5 and Qwen 2.5-Math (Yang et al., 2024), where
the latter underwent additional math pretraining and CoT
finetuning. Measuring token-level prompt entropy across
sequence length reveals that the finetuned model maintains
higher entropy with lower variance across examples.
7
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
(a) Prompt Entropy
 (b) Curvature
 (c) LiDAR
Figure 4: Strong trends in intermediate behavior emerge during trainingRepresentation evaluation metrics across layers
at various Pythia-410M training checkpoints, ranging from step 1 to the final step at 143k. The x-axis is the model layer,
showing how training affects different layers, while the colors are different checkpoints during training.
Figure 5: Token-level prompt entropy across sequence
lengths for Qwen 2.5 and Qwen 2.5-Math. The base model
(Qwen 2.5) exhibits greater prompt compression, while the
finetuned (Qwen 2.5-Math) has higher entropy, indicating
more information retention.
These findings suggest that CoT finetuning encourages mod-
els to preserve more context throughout their hidden layers,
enabling better multi-step reasoning. Our framework pro-
vides a quantitative lens into how CoT fine-tuning pushes
models to maintain richer internal representations across
sequences, explaining its effectiveness in multi-step tasks.
While CoT traces can be inspected directly in these models,
our approach is particularly valuable for analyzing models
that reason in continuous latent space (Hao et al., 2024).
5. Extreme Input Conditions
To better probe the underlying factors affecting represen-
tation quality, we inspect each layer’s responsiveness to
different input types. We use Pythia-410M on three types
of extreme prompts and measure prompt entropy across
layers (Figure 6). We prove examples of these prompts in
Appendix F. Overall, we find that:
1. Token repetition compresses intermediate layers.
As p increases (i.e., more repeated tokens), prompt en-
tropy decreases sharply in mid-depth layers, suggesting
that the model recognizes/encodes repetitive patterns
and discards redundancy in its internal representation.
2. Random tokens inflate early-layer entropy. Adding
token-level randomness, increases entropy significantly
in early layers, revealing their sensitivity to noise. In
contrast, deeper layers are more robust.
Overall, these results confirm that intermediate layers play
a major role in handling complex or unusual inputs, selec-
tively compressing or filtering out repetitive patterns while
retaining crucial distinctions. Early layers are more sensitive
to noise and the incremental benefit of adding more tokens
diminishes with prompt length. This behavior highlights the
diverse ways in which different layers balance the trade-off
between preserving and discarding information, underscor-
ing the significance of intermediate representations.
6. Comparison to Vision Transformers
Do our findings extend to other domains like computer
vision? Vision models employ diverse architectures and
training objectives from fully supervised learning to self-
supervised methods, and from bidirectional to autoregres-
sive encoders. Their diversity provides an ideal testbed to
examine how well our findings generalize and how different
training objectives shape internal representations.
We examine several representative vision approaches:
ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), a supervised transformer
trained on labeled data; CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), a
weakly supervised image encoder; BEiT (Bao et al., 2022),
a self-supervised encoder that reconstructs masked patches;
DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2024), a self-supervised approach
leveraging augmentations and exponential moving average
teachers; MAE (He et al., 2022), a self-supervised approach
8
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
0 5 10 15 20
Layer
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9Average Normalized Prompt Entropy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Percent of T oken Repetition
(a) Repetition
0 5 10 15 20
Layer
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0Average Normalized Prompt Entropy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Percent of T oken Randomness (b) Randomness
0 5 10 15 20
Layer
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5Average Prompt Entropy
64
128
256
512
1024
Prompt T oken Length (log scale) (c) Random Prompt Length
Figure 6: Prompt entropy across layers of Pythia 410M under various extreme input conditions. (a) Increasing token
repetition leads to decreased entropy in intermediate layers. (b) Increasing token randomness results in higher entropy,
especially in initial layers. (c) Unnormalized prompt entropy increases with prompt length due to the larger number of
tokens. These results demonstrate how the model’s internal representations adapt to different types of input perturbations.
that reconstructs images from masked patches; AIM (El-
Nouby et al., 2024), an autoregressive transformer that pre-
dicts the next patch in an image sequence (GPT-style next-
token prediction); and AIMv2 (Fini et al., 2025), which
extends AIM with a multimodal next-token prediction task.
In Figure 14, we evaluate every model layer on ImageNet-1k
with attention probing and our suite of metrics.
AIM exhibits behavior similar to language models.
AIM, which predicts image patches sequentially, exhibits
the same entropy "valley" and accuracy peak at intermedi-
ate layers that we observed in language models like Pythia.
This pattern suggests that autoregressive training, whether
over text tokens or image patches, consistently creates a
mid-depth information bottleneck. The sequential predic-
tion constraint forces models to compress non-local con-
textual information early in processing, then selectively
re-expand the most relevant features for accurate predic-
tion. AIM’s strong intermediate performance was first noted
in (El-Nouby et al., 2024). Interestingly, while the AIMv2
model does not show improved intermediate accuracy, it still
produces an entropy valley. We hypothesize this difference
is due to the multimodal text-vision pretext task, which may
alter information compression dynamics.
Vision transformers behave differently from language
models. All models except for AIM exhibit strictly in-
creasing downstream accuracy toward final layers. Similar
trends have been shown for ResNets (Sorscher et al., 2022),
where few-shot classification error is strictly decreasing
across layers. Most non-autoregressive vision models show
steadily increasing dataset entropy. The notable exception is
BEIT, which exhibits a substantial intermediate dip. Taken
together, the results suggest that without an autoregressive
objective, vision transformers have less need for drastic
transformations at mid-depth.
Autoregression as the driving factor. The strong mid-
layer compression observed in LLMs seems to be not purely
a property of “sequential token data” vs. “image patch data,”
but rather a byproduct of pretraining. While various self-
supervised (or fully supervised) objectives in vision foster
more uniform feature building across layers, autoregressive
vision models develop similar mid-layer bottlenecks that
we see in language. Thus, the objective design–whether or
not a model is autoregressive—appears crucial in shaping
layer-wise representation quality, regardless of domain.
7. Discussion and Conclusion
We investigated the representation quality of intermediate
layers in LLMs and their role in downstream task perfor-
mance. We introduced a unified framework of evaluation
metrics, establish theoretical connections among them, and
apply these metrics to analyze transformer-based architec-
tures, SSMs, and vision models. A key phenomenon un-
veiled by prompt entropy was an information bottleneck
in the middle layers of autoregressive transformers in both
vision and language domains. Furthermore, we show that
intermediate layers often surpass final layers in representa-
tion quality, holding implications for feature relevance and
extraction. DiME, curvature, and infoNCE correlate well
with downstream performance, suggesting a fundamental
connection between representation and generalizability.
In conclusion, our work studies the internal representation
dynamics in LLMs, offering theoretical and empirical in-
sights as well as practical implications for optimizing model
design and training strategies. Future work should further
investigate the underlying causes of intermediate layer com-
pression and do explicit finetuning to control compression.
9
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Impact Statement
Our paper studies the inner workings of large language
models with findings that may challenge typical assump-
tions about the importance of intermediate layers in large
language models and the representations they learn. Our
findings suggest that representations from these layers can
yield better performance on a variety of downstream tasks,
which can have implications for model interpretability, ro-
bustness, and efficiency.
From an ethical standpoint, the ability to leverage
intermediate-layer representations could impact fairness and
bias considerations in evaluating model performance or in
model deployment. By helping better identify latent features
and representations, our approach may amplify latent biases.
We welcome and encourage future work to explore methods
that can ensure that intermediate-layer representations do
not disproportionately reinforce biases or lead to unintended
disparities in real-world applications.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feed-
back, which helped improve the clarity and presentation of
our results. We are also grateful to Diego Doimo, Artemii
Novoselov, Jhoan Keider Hoyos Osorio, Luis Sanchez, and
Matteo Saponati (listed alphabetically) for fruitful discus-
sions and helpful pointers to related literature. Oscar Skean
is supported by the Office of the Under Secretary of De-
fense for Research and Engineering under award number
FA9550-21-1-0227.
References
Agrawal, K. K., Mondal, A. K., Ghosh, A., and Richards,
B. α-ReQ: Assessing representation quality in self-
supervised learning by measuring eigenspectrum decay.
NeurIPs, 2022.
Alain, G. and Bengio, Y . Understanding intermediate layers
using linear classifier probes. ICLR, 2017.
Arefin, M. R., Subbaraj, G., Gontier, N., LeCun, Y ., Rish,
I., Shwartz-Ziv, R., and Pal, C. Seq-VCR: Preventing
collapse in intermediate transformer representations for
enhanced reasoning. ICLR, 2025.
Bach, F. Information theory with kernel methods. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 2022.
Bao, H., Dong, L., Piao, S., and Wei, F. BeIT: Bert pre-
training of image transformers. ICLR, 2022.
Barbero, F., Arroyo, A., Gu, X., Perivolaropoulos, C., Bron-
stein, M., Veliˇckovi´c, P., and Pascanu, R. Why do LLMs
attend to the first token? arXiv, 2025.
Behnam Ghader, P., Adlakha, V ., Mosbach, M., Bahdanau,
D., Chapados, N., and Reddy, S. LLM2Vec: Large lan-
guage models are secretly powerful text encoders.COLM,
2024.
Biderman, S., Schoelkopf, H., Anthony, Q. G., Bradley,
H., O’Brien, K., Hallahan, E., Khan, M. A., Purohit,
S., Prashanth, U. S., Raff, E., et al. Pythia: A suite
for analyzing large language models across training and
scaling. ICML, 2023.
Boes, P., Eisert, J., Gallego, R., Müller, M. P., and Wilming,
H. V on neumann entropy from unitarity.Physical review
letters, 2019.
Bordes, F., Balestriero, R., Garrido, Q., Bardes, A., and Vin-
cent, P. Guillotine regularization: Why removing layers
is needed to improve generalization in self-supervised
learning. TMLR, 2023.
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D.,
Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-V oss, A., Krueger, G.,
Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D., Wu, J.,
Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M.,
Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish,
S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., and Amodei, D. Language
models are few-shot learners. NeurIPs, 2020.
Brunner, G., Liu, Y ., Pascual, D., Richter, O., Ciaramita, M.,
and Wattenhofer, R. On identifiability in transformers.
ICLR, 2020.
Burns, C., Ye, H., Klein, D., and Steinhardt, J. Discovering
latent knowledge in language models without supervision.
ICLR, 2023.
Chen, M., Radford, A., Child, R., Wu, J., Jun, H., Luan,
D., and Sutskever, I. Generative pretraining from pixels.
ICML, 2020.
Cheng, E., Doimo, D., Kervadec, C., Macocco, I., Yu,
J., Laio, A., and Baroni, M. Emergence of a high-
dimensional abstraction phase in language transformers.
ICLR, 2025.
Csordás, R., Manning, C. D., and Potts, C. Do language
models use their depth efficiently? arXiv, 2025.
DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capa-
bility in LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv, 2025.
Deletang, G., Ruoss, A., Duquenne, P.-A., Catt, E., Ge-
newein, T., Mattern, C., Grau-Moya, J., Wenliang, L. K.,
Aitchison, M., Orseau, L., et al. Language modeling is
compression. ICLR, 2024.
10
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. NAACL, 2019.
Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn,
D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M.,
Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al. An image is worth 16x16
words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.ICLR,
2021.
Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A.,
Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan, A.,
et al. The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv, 2024.
El-Nouby, A., Klein, M., Zhai, S., Bautista, M. A., Toshev,
A., Shankar, V ., Susskind, J. M., and Joulin, A. Scalable
pre-training of large autoregressive image models. ICML,
2024.
Fan, S., Jiang, X., Li, X., Meng, X., Han, P., Shang, S., Sun,
A., Wang, Y ., and Wang, Z. Not all layers of LLMs are
necessary during inference. arXiv, 2024.
Fini, E., Shukor, M., Li, X., Dufter, P., Klein, M.,
Haldimann, D., Aitharaju, S., da Costa, V . G. T., Béthune,
L., Gan, Z., et al. Multimodal autoregressive pre-training
of large vision encoders. CVPR, 2025.
Garrido, Q., Balestriero, R., Najman, L., and Lecun, Y .
RankMe: Assessing the downstream performance of
pretrained self-supervised representations by their rank.
ICML, 2023.
Giraldo, L. G. S., Rao, M., and Principe, J. C. Measures of
entropy from data using infinitely divisible kernels. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 2014.
Gu, A. and Dao, T. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling
with selective state spaces. COLM, 2024.
Gu, X., Pang, T., Du, C., Liu, Q., Zhang, F., Du, C., Wang,
Y ., and Lin, M. When attention sink emerges in language
models: An empirical view. ICLR, 2025.
Gurnee, W. and Tegmark, M. Language models represent
space and time. arXiv, 2023.
Hao, S., Sukhbaatar, S., Su, D., Li, X., Hu, Z., Weston, J.,
and Tian, Y . Training large language models to reason in
a continuous latent space. arXiv, 2024.
He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y ., Dollár, P., and Girshick, R.
Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. CVPR,
2022.
Hosseini, E. and Fedorenko, E. Large language models im-
plicitly learn to straighten neural sentence trajectories to
construct a predictive representation of natural language.
NeurIPs, 2023.
Jin, M., Yu, Q., Huang, J., Zeng, Q., Wang, Z., Hua, W.,
Zhao, H., Mei, K., Meng, Y ., Ding, K., et al. Explor-
ing concept depth: How large language models acquire
knowledge at different layers? arXiv, 2024.
Lad, V ., Gurnee, W., and Tegmark, M. The remarkable
robustness of LLMs: Stages of inference? arXiv, 2024.
Li, Y ., Choi, D., Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J.,
Leblond, R., Eccles, T., Keeling, J., Gimeno, F., Dal Lago,
A., et al. Competition-level code generation with alpha-
code. Science, 2022.
Liu, N. F., Gardner, M., Belinkov, Y ., Peters, M. E., and
Smith, N. A. Linguistic knowledge and transferability of
contextual representations. NAACL, 2019.
Ma, E. NLP Augmentation, 2019. URL https://
github.com/makcedward/nlpaug.
Mallen, A. T. and Belrose, N. Eliciting latent knowledge
from quirky language models. ICLR 2024 Workshop on
Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Founda-
tion Models, 2024.
Mamou, J., Le, H., Del Rio, M. A., Stephenson, C., Tang,
H., Kim, Y ., and Chung, S. Emergence of separable
manifolds in deep language representations. ICML, 2020.
Marion, P., Wu, Y .-H., Sander, M. E., and Biau, G. Implicit
regularization of deep residual networks towards neural
odes. ICLR, 2024.
Merity, S., Xiong, C., Bradbury, J., and Socher, R. Pointer
sentinel mixture models. ICLR, 2017.
Muennighoff, N., Tazi, N., Magne, L., and Reimers, N.
MTEB: Massive text embedding benchmark. EACL,
2022.
Oord, A. v. d., Li, Y ., and Vinyals, O. Representation
learning with contrastive predictive coding. ICLR, 2018.
Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., V o, H., Szafraniec,
M., Khalidov, V ., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F.,
El-Nouby, A., et al. DINOv2: Learning robust visual
features without supervision. TMLR, 2024.
Park, K., Choe, Y . J., Jiang, Y ., and Veitch, V . The ge-
ometry of categorical and hierarchical concepts in large
language models. ICML 2024 Workshop on Mechanistic
Interpretability, 2024a.
Park, K., Choe, Y . J., and Veitch, V . The linear represen-
tation hypothesis and the geometry of large language
models. ICML, 2024b.
11
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G.,
Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J.,
et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision. ICML, 2021.
Raghu, M., Gilmer, J., Yosinski, J., and Sohl-Dickstein, J.
SVCCA: Singular vector canonical correlation analysis
for deep learning dynamics and interpretability. NeurIPs,
2017.
Razzhigaev, A., Mikhalchuk, M., Goncharova, E., Os-
eledets, I., Dimitrov, D., and Kuznetsov, A. The shape
of learning: Anisotropy and intrinsic dimensions in
transformer-based models. EACL, 2024.
Rényi, A. On measures of entropy and information.Proceed-
ings of the fourth Berkeley symposium on mathematical
statistics and probability, 1961.
Roy, O. and Vetterli, M. The effective rank: A measure
of effective dimensionality. European signal processing
conference, 2007.
Saponati, M., Sager, P., Aceituno, P. V ., Stadelmann, T., and
Grewe, B. The underlying structures of self-attention:
symmetry, directionality, and emergent dynamics in trans-
former training. arXiv, 2025.
Scholkopf, B. and Smola, A. J. Learning with kernels:
support vector machines, regularization, optimization,
and beyond. MIT press, 2018.
Shwartz-Ziv, R. Information flow in deep neural networks.
PhD thesis, Hebrew University, 2022.
Shwartz-Ziv, R. and Tishby, N. Opening the black box of
deep neural networks via information. Entropy, 2019.
Shwartz-Ziv, R., Balestriero, R., Kawaguchi, K., Rud-
ner, T. G., and LeCun, Y . An information theory per-
spective on variance-invariance-covariance regularization.
NeurIPs, 2023.
Skean, O., Osorio, J. K. H., Brockmeier, A. J., and Giraldo,
L. G. S. DiME: Maximizing mutual information by a
difference of matrix-based entropies. arXiv, 2023.
Skean, O., Dhakal, A., Jacobs, N., and Giraldo, L.
G. S. FroSSL: Frobenius norm minimization for self-
supervised learning. ECCV, 2024.
Sorscher, B., Ganguli, S., and Sompolinsky, H. Neural repre-
sentational geometry underlies few-shot concept learning.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2022.
Tenney, I., Das, D., and Pavlick, E. BERT rediscovers the
classical nlp pipeline. NAACL, 2019.
Thilak, V ., Huang, C., Saremi, O., Dinh, L., Goh, H., Nakki-
ran, P., Susskind, J. M., and Littwin, E. LiDAR: Sensing
linear probing performance in joint embedding ssl archi-
tectures. ICLR, 2024.
Tian, Y ., Krishnan, D., and Isola, P. Contrastive multiview
coding. ECCV, 2020.
Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi,
A., Babaei, Y ., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P.,
Bhosale, S., et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models. arXiv, 2023.
Valeriani, L., Doimo, D., Cuturello, F., Laio, A., Ansuini,
A., and Cazzaniga, A. The geometry of hidden represen-
tations of large transformer models. NeurIPs, 2023.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L. u., and Polosukhin, I. Atten-
tion is all you need. NeurIPs, 2017.
V oita, E., Sennrich, R., and Titov, I. The bottom-up evolu-
tion of representations in the transformer: A study with
machine translation and language modeling objectives.
EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019.
Wei, L., Tan, Z., Li, C., Wang, J., and Huang, W. Diff-
eRank: A novel rank-based metric for evaluating large
language models. NeurIPs, 2024.
Xiao, G., Tian, Y ., Chen, B., Han, S., and Lewis, M. Ef-
ficient streaming language models with attention sinks.
ICLR, 2024.
Yang, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B.,
Li, C., Liu, D., Huang, F., Wei, H., Lin, H., Yang, J., Tu,
J., Zhang, J., Yang, J., Yang, J., Zhou, J., Lin, J., Dang,
K., Lu, K., Bao, K., Yang, K., Yu, L., Li, M., Xue, M.,
Zhang, P., Zhu, Q., Men, R., Lin, R., Li, T., Xia, T., Ren,
X., Ren, X., Fan, Y ., Su, Y ., Zhang, Y ., Wan, Y ., Liu, Y .,
Cui, Z., Zhang, Z., and Qiu, Z. Qwen2.5 technical report.
arXiv, 2024.
Zhao, Z., Ziser, Y ., and Cohen, S. B. Layer by layer: Uncov-
ering where multi-task learning happens in instruction-
tuned large language models. EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2024.
Zhouyin, Z. and Liu, D. Understanding neural networks
with logarithm determinant entropy estimator. arXiv,
2021.
12
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
A. Architectural Details
In this section, we elaborate on the specific architectures of
transformers and State Space Models (SSMs). We outline
the mathematical foundations, including the weight matri-
ces, attention mechanisms for transformers, and the state
transition matrices for SSMs. Detailed equations and pa-
rameter configurations are provided to facilitate replication
and deeper understanding.
A.1. Transformer
The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) utilizes
self-attention mechanisms. Given an input x, the key (K),
query (Q), and value (V) matrices are computed as:
Q = xWQ, K = xWK, V = xWV , (2)
where WQ, WK ∈ Rd×dk and WV ∈ Rd×dv are learned
weights.
The attention weights are calculated using:
A = softmax
 QK⊤
√dk
+ M

, (3)
where M is a mask to enforce causality in autoregressive
tasks.
The output is then:
y = A V. (4)
A.2. State Space Models
SSMs (Gu & Dao, 2024) model sequences using recurrent
dynamics. The hidden state ht and output yt at time t are
updated as:
ht = Aht−1 + Bxt, (5)
yt = Cht + Dxt, (6)
where A ∈ Rn×n, B ∈ Rn×d, C ∈ Rd×n, and D ∈ Rd×d
are learned parameters.
B. Discussion on Prompt Entropy
The first measure of token embedding diversity we call
prompt entropy. This entropy is measured on the interme-
diate tokens and captures how diverse the token representa-
tions are.
We follow the work of (Wei et al., 2024) and use α-order
matrix-based entropy (Giraldo et al., 2014; Skean et al.,
2023; 2024), which serves as a tractable surrogate for tradi-
tional Rényi’sα-order entropy (Rényi, 1961). The quantity
is calculated using a similarity kernel κ on a batch of sam-
ples drawn from a distribution, without making explicit
assumptions on what the true distribution is. The choice of
kernel κ is flexible and can be any infinitely divisible kernel
such as the Gaussian kernel, linear kernel, or Laplacian ker-
nel, among others. For this work, we restrict ourselves to the
linear kernel κ(a, b) = abT . This choice is motivated by the
linear representation hypothesis (Park et al., 2024b) which
finds that large language model representations encode high-
level concepts such as truth (Burns et al., 2023), honesty
(Mallen & Belrose, 2024), and part-of-speech (Mamou et al.,
2020) in linearly separable manifolds.
The equation for matrix-based entropy was previously de-
fined in Eq. 1. One way to interpret Eq. 1 is as the α-order
Rényi entropy of the Gram matrix eigenvalues 2. Notice
how each eigenvalue is divided by tr(KZ) before being
raised to the α power. This is so that the eigenvalues of
KZ sum to one (because tr(·) = Pn
i=1 λi(·)), which is a
necessary condition to treat the eigenvalues as a probability
distribution. Futhermore, each eigenvalue of KZ signifies
the variance of samples in a particular principal component
direction (Scholkopf & Smola, 2018). If entropy is low, then
2The non-zero eigenvalues of the Gram matrix ZZ T are equiv-
alent to those of the covariance matrix Z T Z. Using the covariance
matrix instead of the Gram matrix in Eq. 1 makes no difference
and is more computationally efficient if D < N .
0 2 4 6 8 10
Beta for eigenvalue power law
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Normalized Entropy
Entropy of Power Law Eigenvalues
=0.125
=0.5
=1
=2
=3
=10
LogDet
Figure 7: The behavior of Eq. 1 for varying values of α on
Gram matrices with eigenvalues distributed with a β-power
law such that λi = i−β.
13
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
the eigenvalues form a heavy-tail distribution which implies
that a few components dominate the variance of samples in
Z. On the other hand, at maximum entropy, the eigenvalues
form a uniform distribution and samples are spread equally
in all directions. Matrix-based entropy is reminiscent of
the LogDet entropy which uses the determinant of KZ to
capture how much "volume" a dataset occupies (Shwartz-
Ziv et al., 2023; Zhouyin & Liu, 2021). The LogDet en-
tropy is given by SLogDet(Z) = log det(KZ) − log 2. One
can use Jensen’s inequality to show that the LogDet en-
tropy is a lower bound of Eq 1 when limα→1 (Appendix J.4
of (Shwartz-Ziv et al., 2023)).
Depending on the choice of α, several special cases of
matrix-based entropy can be recovered. In particular, when
limα→1 it equals Shannon entropy (also referred to as von
Neumann entropy in quantum information theory (Bach,
2022; Boes et al., 2019)), and when α = 2 it equals colli-
sion entropy. Interestingly, the case of α = 2 can be cal-
culated without explicit eigendecomposition (Skean et al.,
2024). We show in the Appendix Figure 7 how varying val-
ues of α affect the matrix-based entropy of Gram matrices
with eigenvalues distributed with a β-power law such that
λi = i−β. It is shown that for larger values of α, smaller
eigenvalues contribute more to the entropy.
C. Dataset Details
C.1. Wikitext Dataset
We used the wikitext dataset (Merity et al., 2017) for the
majority of our experiments in Sections 4.2 and 5. This
was downloaded from Salesforce/wikitext on huggingface.
The dataset consists of 100 million tokens scraped from
the Featured articles on wikipedia. We filtered out prompts
which were less than 30 tokens or were wikipedia section
headings.
C.2. MTEB
The 32 tasks we used from the Massive Text Embedding
Benchmark (MTEB) are detailed in Table 1. They are
English language tasks covering clustering, classification,
reranking, and sentence-to-sentence.
D. Prompt Augmentations
For the augmentation-invariance metrics such as infoNCE,
LiDAR, and DiME, we use the NLPAug library (Ma, 2019)
to augment our prompts. We use three types of augmenta-
tions.
• The SplitAug augmentation randomly splits words into
two parts by adding a space.
• The RandomCharAug augmentation randomly inserts,
substitutes, swaps, or deletes characters.
• The Keyboard augmentation randomly substitutes char-
acters with other characters that are at a distance of one
as measured on a QWERTY keyboard. For instance,
the character "k" may be replaced with "i", "l", "m", or
"j".
We use the pseudocode below to do our augmentations us-
ing three types of augmentations, using the default library
settings for each type. When computing augmentation-
invariance metrics like infoNCE or DiME, we use the two
augmented prompts rather than using one augmented prompt
alongside the original prompt. Note that these augmenta-
tions may change the token length T of a prompt.
aug = naf.Sequential([
naw.SplitAug(p=0.3),
nac.RandomCharAug(p=0.3),
nac.KeyboardAug(p=0.3),
])
(aug_A, aug_B) = aug.augment(prompt,
num_augmentations=2)
prompt -> "The quick brown fox jumps
over the lazy dog."
aug_A -> "The quDUk b rown fox wEmps o
ver the l azy dog."
aug_B -> "The qTuXi bro wn fox uVm)s
ob3r the la_k dog."
E. Using Evaluation Metrics as a Performance
Proxy
We previously demonstrated strong correlations between
our unsupervised evaluation metrics and downstream per-
formance. These correlations can be exploited to select
high-performing layers for a given task entirely without su-
pervision, as suggested by prior work (Agrawal et al., 2022;
Garrido et al., 2023; Thilak et al., 2024).
In Figure 2, we apply this unsupervised layer selection
approach to Pythia-410M and LLM2Vec-8B using the 32-
task MTEB benchmark introduced in Section 4.1. Rather
than computing task accuracies for every layer, we compute
DiME, infoNCE, and dataset entropy for each task across all
layers in a single forward pass. For each task, we then select
the layer that minimizes one of these metrics—leveraging
their negative correlation with downstream performance.
This straightforward yet effective method yields substantial
performance improvements with no supervision. For exam-
ple, DiME-based layer selection boosts the average MTEB
score of Pythia-410M by 3%.
14
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
F. Extreme Prompts
F.1. Increasing Repetition
We take regular prompts from the wikitext dataset, tokenize
them, and then for each token we randomly replace it with
probability p. We draw replacements tokens by sampling a
random token from within the prompt. We show examples
below for varying levels of p.
• (p = 0) Mint records indicate the first gold dollars
were produced on May 7...
• (p = 0.1) Mint records indicate the first gold dollars
were Mint Mint May 7...
• (p = 0.5) Mint records Mint Mint Mint gold dollars
were Mint Mint Mint 7...
• (p = 1.0) Mint Mint Mint Mint Mint Mint Mint Mint
Mint Mint Mint Mint Mint...
F.2. Increasing Randomness
We take regular prompts from the wikitext dataset, tokenize
them, and then for each token we randomly replace it with
probability p. We draw replacements uniformly from the
tokenizer distribution. We show examples below for varying
levels of p. Unlike the character-level random noise added
to prompts in Section with random noise discussed in Ap-
pendix D which might change the number of tokens T of
the prompt, the token-level random noise used here does not
do so.
• (p = 0) Mint records indicate the first gold dollars
were produced on May 7...
• (p = 0 .1) Mint records indicate salivary first gold
dollars were produced on May NaCl...
• (p = 0 .5) Mint records Dallas actively first dollars
persufors on Mayder129 18...
• (p = 1 .0) arf emulsion minorensteinorian-
mega_TOStack potsRecip Installifykeeping...
G. Theorems
Definition 1. (Majorization) Let p, q ∈ Rn be nonnega-
tive vectors such thatPN
i=1 pi =PN
i=1 qi. We say that q
majorizes p, denoted by p ≼ q, if their ordered sequences
p[1] ≥ · · · ≥ p[n] and q[1] ≥ · · · ≥ q[n] satisfy:
kX
i=1
p[i] ≤
kX
i=1
q[i] for k = 1, · · · , n (7)
Definition 2. (Schur-Convexity) A real-valued function f
on Rn is called Schur-convex if p ≼ q =⇒ f(p) ≤ f(q),
and Schur-concave if p ≼ q =⇒ f(q) ≤ f(p).
Lemma 1. The matrix-based entropy, as given in Equa-
tion 1, is a Schur-concave function for α > 0. This result is
well-known and, for instance, was recently given by Lemma
4.1 in (Giraldo et al., 2014).
Theorem 4. Suppose we have a matrix of embeddings Z ∈
RN ×D and its covariance Z T Z. Then the effective rank of
Z is an lower bound of exp(S1(Z)), where S1 denotes the
matrix-based entropy of α = 1.
Proof. Denote the ordered singular values of Z as σ1 ≥
· · · ≥ σmin (N,D) ≥ 0 and the ordered eigenvalues of Z T Z
as λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λmin (N,D) ≥ 0. Without loss of generality,
assume that PN
i=1 σi = PN
i=1 λi = 1 . If this is not the
case, then set σi := σiPN
i=1 σi
and λi := λiPN
i=1 λi
.
It is straightforward to show that σ2
i = λi. Because
∀i σ i ≤ 1, we have that σi ≥ λi. This implies that λ ≼ σ.
Therefore, S1(σ) ≤ S1(λ) = ⇒ effective rank(Z) ≤
exp S1(Z).
Proposition 1. (Random Unit V ectors are Nearly Orthog-
onal) Suppose we have m unit vectors in RD, that are dis-
tributed according to the uniform distribution on the hyper-
sphere. Then with probability at least 1 − m2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2 ,
we have that for any pair i, j, i ̸= j,
|⟨vi, vj⟩| ≤ ϵ.
Proof. We can begin by defining the central ϵ-band around
a slice of the hypersphere SD−1 as,
Tϵ = {z ∈ SD−1 : |⟨z, e1⟩| ≤ ϵ/2},
where e1 denotes the first basis vector. The probability of a
uniformly distributed vector on the unit sphere not landing
in Tϵ ⊂ SD−1 can be bounded as,
P(Tϵ) ≥ 1 −
√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2 .
Now, treating vi as e1, the basis vector, without loss of gen-
erality, we have that, when vi, vj are uniformly distributed
on the hyper-sphere,
P(|⟨vi, vj⟩| < ϵ) ≤
√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2
Now, by the union bound on each i ̸= j, we get that,
P(∃i, j : ⟨|vi, vj⟩| > ϵ) ≤
X
i̸=j
P(|⟨vi, vj⟩| > ϵ)
≤ m2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2 .
15
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
So then with probability at least1−m2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2 , we have
that, for any pair i, j,
|⟨vi, vj⟩| ≤ ϵ.
Theorem 5. (Maximum Prompt Entropy implies Large
Dataset Entropy.) Suppose we have a orthogonally equiv-
arient representation model Z such that for all sequences
Zi = Z(Xi) the prompt entropy is maximal and the rows
are unit. Suppose also that the data distribution Data is
a isotropic unit Gaussian. Suppose we draw sequences of
length L = D from the data distribution. Then with prob-
ability 1 − N2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2N 2 over draw of {xi}N
i=1 ∼ Data,
we have that,
|e−S2(QQ⊤) − N
L2 | ≤ ϵ
Proof. First note that, since the prompt entropy is maximal
for each sample i, which we denote Zi = Z(Xi), then
the matrix KZ = ZiZ ⊤
i is full rank. Since by assumption
each row of Zi has unit rows, then we know that ∥Zi∥2
F =
L = PL
k=1 σ2
k. In particular we also know that σl = σj
for all pairs l, j by the assumption that the prompt entropy
is maximized. In particular we then know that ZiZ ⊤
i is a
orthogonal matrix, and the rows of Zi form an orthonormal
set. We can then write, for some Oi a rotation matrix, that,
qi = 1
L
LX
i=1
zi = 1
L Oi1.
We will denote the average over sequences of length
L, across all N samples, by the dataset matrix ¯Z =
(q1, q2, . . .qN)⊤. Since by assumption our model Z(·)
is orthogonally equivariant, and the Data distribution is ra-
dially symmetric, it follows that these {qi}N
i=1 are random
points on the hypersphere of radius 1√
L. This means that
the matrix
√
D ¯Z consists of rows that are uniform points
on hypersphere of radius 1. Now notice that,
∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F = 1
L2 ∥L ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F
= 1
L2 (
NX
i=1
∥
√
Lqi∥2 +
X
i̸=j
⟨
√
Lqi,
√
Lqj⟩).
Since
√
Lqi is a unit vector this will simplify to,
∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F = 1
L2 (N +
X
i̸=j
⟨
√
Lqi,
√
Lqj⟩).
Now notice that by proposition, we have that with probabil-
ity at least 1 − N2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2N 2 ,
∀i ̸= j : ⟨vi, vj⟩ ≤ ϵ
N .
The union bound then tells us that,
P(∀i ̸= j : |⟨
√
Dqi,
√
Dqj⟩| ≤ ϵ
N2 ) ≥ 1−N2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2N 2 .
So then with probability at least 1 − N2√
2πe
−Dϵ2
2N 2 over the
draw of the data points, we have that,
|∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F − N
L2 | ≤ ϵ.
So then since,
S2( ¯Z ¯Z ⊤) = log
 1
∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F

,
we have that, e−S2( ¯Z ¯Z⊤) = ∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F . In particular,
|e−S2( ¯Z ¯Z⊤) − N
L2 | ≤ ϵ.
Which completes the proof.
Theorem 6. (Minimal Prompt Entropy Implies Small
Dataset Entropy.) Suppose we have a orthogonally equivari-
ant representation modelZ such that for all sequencesZi =
Z(Xi) the prompt entropy is minimal and the rows are unit.
Suppose also that the data distribution Data is a isotropic
unit Gaussian. Suppose we draw sequences from the data
distribution. Then with probability 1 − N2√
2πe
−D3 ϵ2
2N 8 over
the draw of {xi}N
i=1 ∼ Data, we have that,
|e−S2( ¯Z ¯Z⊤) − N3
L2 | ≤ ϵ.
Proof. Since the prompt entropy is minimal for each sample,
we know that each Z(Xi) will be a rank one matrix, so we
can write it as the outer product. In particular, we can write
Z(Xi) = viui⊤. However, since the rows of Z(Xi) are of
unit length, we know that all the rows are identical, so we
may write without loss of generality, Z(Xi) = vi1⊤. Then,
it follows that,
qi = 1
L
LX
i=j
zi
j = N
L vi.
We will write the dataset average matrix as before as ¯Z =
(q1, q2, . . .qN)⊤. In particular the matrix D
N
¯Z has rows
that are all unit vectors, and these are randomly distributed
uniformly on the hyper-sphere. Now notice that,
∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F =
NX
i=1
∥qi∥2 +
X
i̸=j
⟨qi, qj⟩
=
NX
i=1
N2
L2 ∥vi∥2 +
X
i̸=j
N2
L2 ⟨vi, vj⟩
= N3
L2 +
X
i̸=j
N2
L2 ⟨vi, vj⟩.
16
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Now by the prior proposition, with probability at least 1 −
N2√
2πe
−D3 ϵ2
2N 8 , we know that, for all i ̸= j,
|⟨vi, vj⟩| ≤ ϵL2
N4 .
So then we have that,
|∥ ¯Z ¯Z ⊤∥2
F − N3
L2 | ≤
X
i̸=j
N2
L2 ⟨|vi, vj⟩| ≤ 1
L2
X
i̸=j
ϵ ≤ ϵ.
In particular,
|e−S2( ¯Z ¯Z⊤) − N3
L2 | ≤ ϵ.
Theorem 7. (Dataset Entropy Bounds InfoNCE) Let X ∼
Data be a discrete random variable distributed according to
the data distribution. Let X → Z be the Markovian relation
between X and the representation Z. Then, the InfoNCE
loss on N samples from Data satisfies,
log(N) − InfoNCE ≤ I(X; Z) ≤ H(Z).
The entropy H(Z) is analogous to the Dataset Entropy.
Proof. The first inequality follows as a simple result from
(Oord et al., 2018). Then, use that,
I(X; Z) = H(Z) − H(Z|X) ≤ H(Z).
H. Additional Plots & Visualizations
Prompt Entropy Dataset Entropy DiME LiDAR InfoNCE Curvature
Representation Metrics
-1.00
-0.75
-0.50
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Values
-0.77 -0.77 -0.84
-0.72 -0.80 -0.83
-0.39 -0.43 -0.39 -0.37 -0.42 -0.38
0.81 0.81 0.86
0.76 0.84 0.85
Relationships between Rep. Metric & T ask Performance
Dependency Measures
dCor
Figure 8: Relationships between representation metrics
and task performance averaged across layers for Pythia
410M. Using a variety of linear and non-linear measures—
Spearman’sρ, Kendall’sτ, and distance correlation (dCor)—
we see strong inversely associative relationships with the
exception of InfoNCE which shows a positive, but still
strong associativity. Ranges of ρ, τ ∈ [−1, 1] and dCor
∈ [0, 1] with 0 indicating independence and 1 indicating
strong dependency.
17
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Prompt Entropy Curvature DiME InfoNCE LiDAR Dataset Entropy
Representation Metrics
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00Distance Correlation (dCor)
Figure 9: Relationship between representation metrics and task performance averaged across layers for BERT.
Using distance correlation (dCor), we see strong associative relationships across the board with LiDAR and dataset entropy
exhibiting the strongest relationship with downstream performance. We use dcor due to its robustness and ability to measure
both linear and non-linear relationships (dCor ∈ [0, 1] with 0 indicating statistical independence and 1 indicating strong
dependency). Other correlative measures also indicate moderate to strong relationships.
Task Domain Tasks # Tasks (32 Total)
Pair Classification SprintDuplicateQuestions, TwitterSemEval2015, TwitterURLCorpus 3
Classification AmazonCounterfactualClassification, AmazonReviewsClassification, Bank-
ing77Classification, EmotionClassification, MTOPDomainClassification, MTOPIn-
tentClassification, MassiveIntentClassification, MassiveScenarioClassification,
ToxicConversationsClassification, TweetSentimentExtractionClassification
10
Clustering ArxivClusteringS2S, BiorxivClusteringS2S, MedrxivClusteringS2S, RedditClustering,
StackExchangeClustering, TwentyNewsgroupsClustering
6
Reranking AskUbuntuDupQuestions, MindSmallReranking, SciDocsRR, StackOverflowDupQues-
tions
4
Sentence to Sentence BIOSSES, SICK-R, STS12, STS13, STS14, STS15, STS16, STS17, STSBenchmark 9
Table 1: MTEB Tasks used in experiments covering a wide range of different use-cases and domains.
Model Supervised (Best) Unsupervised
Naive (Last) min-DiME min-infoNCE min-Dataset Entropy
Pythia-410M 52.0 45.5 48.5 46.2 48.1
LLM2Vec-8B 66.3 63.9 60.0 64.3 50.4
Table 2: Average MTEB Performance (%) across Different Layer Selection Schemes
18
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
6.0
7.5
9.0
Normalized Prompt Entropy
×10 1
Pythia
Mamba
BERT
(a) Prompt Entropy
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
2
4
6Normalized Dataset Entropy
×10 1
 (b) Dataset Entropy
0 25 50 75 100
Layer Depth Percentage
1.04
1.08
1.12
1.16
Curvature
 (c) Curvature
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
1.5
3.0
4.5
InfoNCE
(d) infoNCE
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
2
3
4LiDAR
 (e) LiDAR
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
0
1
2
3DiME
×10 1
 (f) DiME
Figure 10: textbfPythia’s intermediate layers show pronounced changes in representation quality metrics, while Mamba’s
remain more stable. Representation evaluation metrics across layers in Pythia 410M and Mamba 370M architectures. The
x-axis denotes model depth as a percentage, allowing fair comparison between models with different layer counts.
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
0.60
0.75
0.90Prompt Entropy
Prompt Entropy
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
0.2
0.4
0.6Dataset Entropy
Dataset Entropy
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
1.04
1.08
1.12
1.16Curvature
Curvature
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
1
2
3infoNCE
infoNCE
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
2
3
4LiDAR
LiDAR
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3DiME
DiME
100
101
102
103
104
105
Training Step
Figure 11: Representation evaluation metrics across layers at various training checkpoints, ranging from step 1 to the
final step at 143k. The x-axis represents the depth percentage of the model, showing how training affects different layers,
particularly in the intermediate stages.
19
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
4.5
6.0
7.5
Normalized Prompt Entropy
×10 1
Pythia-14m
Pythia-70m
Pythia-160m
Pythia-410m
Pythia-1b
(a) Prompt Entropy
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
1.5
1.8
2.1
2.4
Curvature
×10 1
 (b) Curvature
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer Depth Percentage
1
2
3
4LiDAR
 (c) LiDAR
Figure 12: Pythia and Mamba’s intermediate layers show pronounced changes in representation quality metrics,
while BERT’s remain more stable.Three representation evaluation metrics calculated on the wikitext dataset for every
layer in Pythia-410M, Mamba 370M, and BERT-base architectures. The x-axis denotes layer depth as a percentage, allowing
fair comparison between models with different layer counts.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer
2
3
4
5Normalized Prompt Entropy
×10 1
Llama3
LLM2Vec-mntp-unsup-simcse
LLM2Vec-mntp-supervised
(a) Prompt Entropy
0 20 40 60 80 100
Layer
2
3
4LiDAR
 (b) Curvature
Figure 13: Finetuning affects the internal behavior of LLMs. Representation evaluation metrics across layers for Llama3
and two finetuned versions of Llama3.
20
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
20
40
60
80Attention Probing Val@1
AIM
AIMv2
BEiT
CLIP
DINOv2
MAE
ViT
(a) Validation Top-1 Accuracy
0 5 10 15 20 25
Layer
4
2
0
2
4
Accuracy Difference Relative to Final Layer
 (b) Accuracy Difference Relative to Last Layer
0 5 10 15 20
Layer
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85Normalized Prompt Entropy
(c) Prompt Entropy
0 5 10 15 20
Layer
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8Normalized Dataset Entropy
 (d) Dataset Entropy
Figure 14: Comparison of vision models trained on different pretext tasks. The dataset is ImageNet-100 (Tian et al.,
2020) and all models use the same 24-layer ViT-L architecture. The validation accuracy is calculated using attention probing
on tokens from a frozen backbone layer, following the work of El-Nouby et al. (2024)
21
Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Language Models
Figure 15: Behavior of effective rank at different stages within a transformer block.
22
